http://stmedia.startribune.com/images/ows_142215195945920.jpg - backstrom header

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ice_hockey#/media/File:Silver7.jpg

plante - https://i.ytimg.com/vi/I72YWXkaWmE/maxresdefault.jpg

goalie gear pic - blog.icewarehouse.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Hockey-Goalie-Gear.jpg

hasek - https://cdn-s3.si.com/s3fs-public/si/multimedia/photo_gallery/0806/nhl.dominik.hasek.career/images/04.dominik-hasek.jpg

patrick roy - https://nhl.bamcontent.com/images/photos/285995646/1284x722/cut.jpg


Equipment:

MASK
The most important piece of equipment a goaltender wears is the mask. Goaltender masks have come a long way from the old days, where they weren’t worn full time until around 1959. 

Modern masks come in many different shapes, sizes, and designs, and are also made with materials that deliver varying levels of durability, weight, and comfort. 

Elite Masks are usually priced at a minimum of $500 and the price can increase significantly from there depending on materials and customization. These are worn by goaltenders playing at an elite level, such as collegiate, juniors (15+ years old), and minor pros. The shell of the mask will contain Kevlar, Ballistic Lexan, and carbon composite materials, only usually high quality versions of those materials. Cages for these masks are built with high durability materials, titanium being the most frequent base material. Internal padding in elite masks is more comfortable and shock absorbing than the lesser masks.

Competitive Masks are around $250 to $500 and provide adequate protection for most goaltenders, from a high school player to a “beer-league” player. They are comparable in some respects to elite masks but have some differences, such as weight, feel, and materials used in construction. These masks are generally made with highly durable fiberglass, but can experience chips or cracks that would otherwise not occur in an elite mask if hit with a hard enough shot. Cages are close in quality to elite level masks, but may not be as rust-resistant or as strong in some circumstances. In most cases they are interchangeable. Padding in comp level masks provide a more comfortable, protective fit than entry level masks but can be heavier and denser than elite level gear. 

Cheaper masks, around $250 and under, are constructed with cheaper fiberglass or plastic-based compounds. Plastic does not protect as well as composite fiberglass and can be much more susceptible to cracks and breaks. Foam in entry level masks is usually thick and soft comfort foam, and won’t absorb as much shock as padding in higher level masks. These are recommended for children or lower level recreational goalies (ball hockey).

I started with a entry level mask, not knowing much about the different types of equipment. After taking a few hard shots to the face, and playing against better and better opponents, I started to feel less and less safe on the ice. My ears would ring and I started to get headaches after games when I’d take a shot to the head. I opted to purchase a competitive level mask, and the difference has been night and day. Shots that before would have knocked me out of a game or made my next few days hazy are now easily absorbed and shrugged off by the helmet. No more ringing ears or headaches. If you are a perspective buyer and wondering whether you should go with an entry level or a competitive level…always go with the competitive option. You only get one head.

SKATES
Goaltenders wear a different skate than players; they have longer and flatter runners (blades) than player skates for better stability and horizontal movement, and the boots are lighter to allow for flexible ankle movement. They do have extra plastic around the base of the foot called Cowling to protect the parts of the foot that aren’t protected by the leg pads. 

The sizing system for the boots is similar to that of the player skates: 1 to 1.5 sizes down from running shoe sizes. For example I wear a 8.5 to 9 shoe, so I look for something around a 7 when I look at skates. Boot widths are similar as well. There is the standard D width, E for wide and EE for extra wide. When fitting the boot, it’s important to not have your toes touching the front of the boot, since taking a shot to the toe, even with cowling, is not enjoyable. Somewhere between 1/8 to 1/4 of an inch is the range you’re looking for.  

I personally started with an old pair of Graf goalie skates that I snagged for $50. For a pair of first skates they did an amazing job; they were broken in, well-tested and had enough support to get me through my introduction to the position. Eventually though, it was time to upgrade. I bought a pair of CCM 42k’s that were lighter and had low cowling. This allowed me to more effectively play a butterfly style of goaltending, which was difficult on the Grafs with more cowling. 

LEG PADS

The modern leg pad is usually the most expensive piece of equipment a goaltender will buy in their kit. They are what goaltenders where to protect their legs from anything coming their way on the ice, from pucks to sticks and skates. Goaltender preference and style of play are a huge factor when it comes to leg pads, from the number of rolls and breakpoints where a pad will bend, down to the number of straps and positioning of the internal foam pieces for leg protection. 

Let’s start with the type of pad a goaltender will wear. There are two types of pads, butterfly and hybrid; both come with their own advantages that tailor to the wearers playing style. The first question to ask is what type of player you are: are you truly a butterfly goaltender, focusing on technique and positioning, or do you use more athleticism and reaction when you make saves? 